# Notes on readings on China and Lecture outline

-   A key idea from Huang and others is that there was a market liberalization boom in the 80s that was rural, and that this was shifted after 89 (Tianamen) towards a more crony-capitalism style focus on cities.
-   Klein and Pettis moreover think that post 2008 there was a real need to keep up GDP, and wanted to expand consumption but could only do so with household debt and didn't want to follow US model. So instead pressed on investment with massive building spree of mostly real-estate.
-   Pettis splits growth into four stages
    1.  Reform and opening up: reforms up to 1989
    2.  The Chinese Development Model: this is the transfer of income to groups with a high propensity to save (mostly the export oriented corporate sector). It was supported by intensive suppression of wages such that China has the highest savings rate ever recorded and very low labor share of output. Wages pushed down in part through the laws against movement (which are not enforced) and labor rights abuses. Also, very regressive tax system. Also financial repression channels savings into select banks with coordinated low interest rates, that then only lend to select firms. To prevent exchange rate appreciation Chinese state (through PBOC) needs to offset its strong capital account surplus (\$1.4 trillion). There should be a financial account deficit as households lend abroad but this is suppressed. And in fact, FDI is attractive so there is a private financial account surplus of \$0.5 trillion! So PBOC accumulates forex reserves of \$1.9 trillion to offset flows and prevent exchange rate appreciation.
    3.  From High Investment to Overinvestment: Basically, argues that since the late 1990s the rate of return on these investment projects has fallen. Whereas it used to be that since China was a poor rapidly growing country throwing money at practically anything had a positive net return that stopped being true. But since GDP is a planned objective, and since local officials can allocate investment out of local banks largely at will, and the projects they invest in will not be allowed to fail so investments are rarely written down, the result is that GDP is easily goosed by increased investment but the investment is unproductive. In fact, point to some estimates of productivity that show that in recent years its not going anywhere. There is a lot of smart speculatino about trade war making the point that you cannot resolve the impact of a trade war tracking GDP as China depends on external markets to absorb surplus. Also suggests could see Belt and Road Initiative in part as a hunt for markets to absorb surplus.
    4.  The Spirit of 78:
