# Lecture 10: Digital currency in historical perspective

The purpose of this lecture is *not* to try to offer a history of the emergence of crypto, which is recent, somewhat opaque, and something I am not particularly knowledgable about. Rather, we want to try to place monetary innovation within a longer view -- specifically, the sort of view afforded by the material covered in this course. Crypto is an interesting case in which to do this in part precisely because it has been so grandiosely billed as heralding a new monetary future. So, part of what we want to do today is to get a handle on what is new in the new digital currencies, and to think through what sort of historical analogies are helpful for the different parts of the digital currency ecosystem.

The plan for today is to start with some nuts-and-bolts to be sure that we all have some sense for the different kinds of financial products that we're talking about, and then to think about some of the analogies offered up by the literature.

### Types of digital currencies

When people talk about digital currencies they are referencing several broad classes of things. First, and most ubiquitous, is what Gorton and Zhang refer to as 'fiat cryptocurrencies'. Here the prototypical example would be Bitcoin. These currencies are 'fiat' in the sense that they are not backed by anything -- you cannot redeem a bitcoin for a dollar as you can Tether, or a demand deposit, nor can you redeem it for a particular service or good as you could say an arcade ticket for a prize. While nominally a fiat cryptocurrency *could* be associated with some stream of benefits -- and various companies have nodded towards the idea that they might issue cryptocurrencies for something in particular, in practice you hold Bitcoin because you think other people might want to hold it at some point. Thus most fiat cryptocurrencies seem mostly to be vehicles for speculation. There are also some potential services these currencies might generate: for instance, maybe you want to transfer some money in a way that is otherwise difficult, or hide some earnings from the state, or get paid for various kinds of criminal activity like ransomeware or selling drugs online, etc.

A second sort of digital currency is what Gorton and Zhang call a 'utility token'. There are scant examples of this and they are not prolix in their examples. But in principal this is a token issued by an organization for tracking payments within the organization itself and would be redeemable against specified goods and services. One could imagine airline miles or credit-card reward points loosely fitting this model.

Finally, the kind of digital currency Gorton and Zhang are worked up about is a 'stablecoin'. Stablecoins are digital tokens that are issued with a corresponding promise that they will be redeemable for a fixed quantity of government-issued fiat currency -- typically dollars although a euro coin also exists. Because stablecoins are nominally redeemable for dollars they are functionally equivalent to a bank deposit, or a money market fund (the analogy is also occasionally draws to a foreign currency on a pegged exchange rate). All these analogies are similar and similarly helpful. In particular, they clarify that stablecoins are variably stable, and their stability is related to the likelihood that they could make good on redemptions should they occur.

There are some related sub-genres we will dwell on. First, a lot of ink has been spilled recently on Central Bank Digital Currencies (CBDCs). Macroeconomists are very excited about these for several reasons but mostly because of the opportunities they would afford for conducting monetary policy in new ways. Imagine, for instance, if instead of holding our digital money mostly in the form of bank accounts at private sector commercial banks we held central bank digital currency instead (possibly in the form of central bank accounts at the Fed or BoE?) and then the Central Bank could target us directly with interest rate increases/decreases. They could even easily pierce the zero-lower bound on interest rates by, say, charging us small amounts for our holdings directly when they wanted the interest rate to go negative.

Given the degree to which some economies now run on digital payments (e.g. London coffee shops that *only* take cards) this is viewed as potentially feasible. There are examples e.g. in the Bahamas the Central Bank has created the "Digital Bahamian Sand Dollar". There are, of course, some notable privacy concerns here: cash potentially provides a level of anonymity in transactions that a Bank of England digital token would not. These CBDCs are sort of stable-coins in the sense that they would have a stable value relative to fiat, although thinking of them as *backed* by fiat would be sort of an error as it would be more accurate to say that they *are* fiat: if the Federal Reserve creates a digital Fed-buck it *is* a dollar, its not *backed* by a dollar.

There is also a brave new world sometimes called 'web3' which references a series of 'distributed apps', smart-contracts, art projects, etc. all of which are related to some of the same underlying blockchain technology -- often literally the same as in the Ethereum network -- that underpins other currencies. This is the home of non-fungible tokens (NFTs), which became semi-notorious for their very high valuations of some fairly unexceptional jpegs. The underlying idea is closely linked to the underlying idea of a digital currency, namely the idea of a digital asset that can be transferred without relying on an intermediary. The pictures are something of a side-show -- and in fact most NFTs don't actually reference a picture but instead reference a web location where the picture is hosted: if you bought the hosting service you could swap the picture to whatever you liked or even take it down.

Finally, there is a broad set of things also built out of the same ecosystem as web3 that is referred to as 'decentralized finance'. This is a catch-all for a lot of projects doing a crazy array of different things that is iterating quickly, and I will not pretend to have a handle on it. Out of this mess perhaps the most interesting and persistent thing to emerge seems to be automated market makers: so-called 'liquidity pools' that provide an incentive structure for individuals to act as market makers. So far these actually seem to 'work' -- that is, do something useful -- although the use case is entirely for supporting speculation in cryptocurrencies.

## Notes on readings

### Gorton & Zhang

They come up with a tripartite classification of digital currencies

1.  'Fiat Cryptocurrencies': e.g. Bitcoin. These are not backed by anything.
2.  'Utility coins' they give the example of a currency used within JPMorgan. These are entity-linked typically it appears
3.  'Stablecoins': these are supposed to be backed by a government issued fiat currency which makes them redeemable 1-for-1.

They talk about the importance of money acquiring a 'no questions asked' (NQA) status which makes it amenable to transactions because participants do not fear that its value is going to fluctuate too much. In their view, only stablecoins promise this feature.

In describing stablecoins note that although they are supposed to be backed 1:1 they display varying degrees of transparency about this including some that are quite clear and some like Tether that have a sort of vague disclosure and seem to hold a lot of corporate paper.
